On the mainframe, the big
three that immediately come to
mind are CICS, IMS, and Db2.
When I first started working on
z Systems I heard
these said together
so often but I thought it was
two things CICS, IMS, and Db2.
But we're talking
about three components
here there's kicks, or CICS,
spelled CICS, IMS, and Db2.
Three different things.
Let's start with CICS.
CICS has been around for
a long time and it powers
many of the world's
transactions such as ATM's,
managing insurance
policies, utility bills,
retail shopping, and others.
It does it all securely and
reliably day in and day out.
A CICS transaction consist of
many facets including
delivering the user interface,
retrieving and
updating information,
and communicating with
other applications
and network attached devices.
In CICS, a transaction
typically lasts
a very short time and is
associated with one unit of work.
CICS takes the work to be
processed and lines it
up with the program or programs
required to complete it.
This was the job of the
transaction manager,
to ensure the work complete
successfully according to
the process and that
there's nothing left
hanging out there when we tell
the user that it's complete.
Here's what's under the hood
that lets this all happen.
A CICS system manages an area of
storage called a region which
lives in an address space.
You'll hear that term
a lot, a CICS region.
A CICS region uses
domains which contain
management nodes for
transaction processing.
Now, a single region
can be defined to
perform all the functions
necessary to process
a transaction.
Typically, a CICS installation
will have several
different regions,
each one devoted to a
different type of transaction.
Think of it like an
auto repair center.
This area's for body work,
over here is for
transmission issues,
tires and wheels over there.
That way, all the tools
that are needed are close
by and the area isn't
crowded with stuff
that they don't need.
There are three types
of domains that
supervise and control
transaction processing.
Remember, these are the
domains within the region.
We've covered a lot there.
So let's make sure we've
got the basic order right.
A CICS system manages
an area of storage
called a blank and within
that it uses blanks.
Let's see if you remember
what those are called.
So a CICS system manages areas
of storage called regions.
Then within the regions,
it manages domains.
There's a transaction
manager, the XM,
which is responsible for
receiving transaction requests
and creating the organizing
tasks to process them.
Then there's the program
manager or PG which handles
locating and invoking
applications
required for processing
transactions.
Then there's these
Storage Manager, SM.
This domain is responsible
for allocating
memory resources required
for all of this to happen.
You can see in this diagram,
we have three types of regions.
There's the TOR,
terminal owning region,
which handles connections to
terminals and other
remote devices.
Then there's the AOR
for application owning
region and the DOR for
Data owning region.
The glue that connects
these regions is VTAM.
Now we haven't really spent
much time talking about VTAM yet,
and we're not going
to get deep into it.
Just know that it has to do with
networking and it's
part of comm server.
The AORs and DORs talk
with other applications
like databases,
and user written applications.
One of those databases
could be IMS.
Now what's IMS?
IMS, Information
Management System has
a long and interesting
history as well
which includes some
development done for NASA.
What makes IMS unique
is that it has or is,
depending on how you look at it,
a hierarchical database
management system.
It is widely used for
manufacturing type of
applications but you'll see it
in just about any industry.
IMS consists of three components.
One is the database manager.
That's the IMS DB.
Then there's the
transaction manager.
That's the IMS TM.
Then there's these system
services that provide
common services to both
the DB and the TM.
These work together
to deliver data and
transactional capabilities in
an extremely efficient way.
For more complex data
handling needs, there's Db2.
Big D little b2.
Db2 is a database and it offers
exceptional availability,
massive scalability,
flexibility, and
installation across
platforms and location,
and a low total
cost of ownership.
Db2 is considered to be
a relational database.
So data exists in one or more
constructs known as tables.
Within those tables, there are
columns and rows and you interact
with data by using the structured
query language or SQL.
Though you can also use Db2 for
unstructured data
and so much more.
Remember those acid properties
we've talked about before?
Db2 people take each one
of those very seriously.
They won't chase something that
gives them increased availability
if it means giving up
consistency and vice versa.
When it comes to truly
enterprise applications,
the middleware like CICS,
IMS, and Db2 need to step up and
deliver time after time
after time after time.
Can't stop, won't
stop. Transaction.